Why would an exercise keep me fatter?
Well, you're doing endurance type
exercise. So, it is an advantage that
your body is giving you to keep you fat
because it sees you trying to do an
activity which requires a fuel load. And
that activity is long in time. And what
your body wants to do is help you get
that work done with the least amount of
energy used possible. So increasing
storage, meaning holding more body fat,
decreasing usage of fuel, which means
decreasing muscle size. So by giving
your body the signals that you want to
be an endurance athlete, you're
basically saying you want to be fatter
and weaker.
Hi, my name is John Jish. I'm a doctor
of biomedical engineering, which gives
me a unique perspective on a lot of
things human physiology and exercise
science related that are different from
what you might be hearing from other
social media influencers. So, today I
want to talk about strength versus
cardio.
And
I get a lot of questions, where should I
put my cardio in in my workout day? And
that's like that's like an everyday
question. Now, primarily my my answer is
why are you doing the cardio? Are you
doing the cardio because you want to be
a great runner? Because if you want to
be a great runner, there's only one way
to do that. You got to run. If you're
doing it because you're trying to lose
body fat, that's the that's not the
right path. It it's not an impossible
path, but your body's going to fight you
the whole way because as you're doing
cardio, you upregulate cortisol, and you
upregulate cortisol for a much more
extended period of time than other
cortisol upregulation activities like
getting out of bed or drinking a cup of
coffee or strength training. Strength
training increases your cortisol because
it's a stress, but it goes back down
very quickly. Endurance type exercise
elevates it for a lot longer. And when
that happens, especially when you do it
on a regular basis, which if you're
trying to become an endurance athlete,
you're doing it on a regular basis, now
you're creating some problems. So you're
upregulating cortisol
in a
chronic manner because you're doing it
every day. Now what does cortisol do? It
does a lot of things but two of the
things it does is it metabolizes it
encourages the body to get rid of muscle
faster. So metabolizing muscle you lose
muscle. The other thing is preservation
of body fat. So it keeps you as fat as
possible as long as possible. Now you
think like why would an exercise keep me
fatter? Well, you're doing endurance
type exercise. So it is an advantage
that your body is giving you to keep you
fat because it sees you trying to do an
activity which requires a fuel load and
that activity is long in time and what
your body wants to do is help you get
that work done with the least amount of
energy used possible. So increasing
storage meaning holding more body fat,
decreasing usage of fuel, which means
decreasing muscle size. So by giving
your body the signals that you want to
be an endurance athlete, you're
basically saying you want to be fatter
and weaker. Now, I know there's some
cardio guys out there who are going to
be really upset about this and you know,
sorry, these are facts. Uh if you don't
like facts, go join the Democratic
Party. can't I can't do anything for
you. You can fix the problem in a number
of ways. You could number one stop doing
cardio, which is the choice I made, or
you can vary your heart rate while you
do it. So, if you're doing your
endurance type exercise, what you need
to do is, let's say, sprint for a minute
and then slow down for 5 to 10 minutes
and then repeat that process. If you
vary the heart rate, you completely
disconnect this process. So what you're
doing is called highintensity interval
training. H IIIT T, not to be confused
with HIT, which is high intensity
training. That ends up solving the
problem. Now, when you want to do this,
uh you never want to do
the interval training or any type of
cardio before you lift. You really want
fresh muscles that are full of glycogen
when you do your resistance exercise.
So, if I have some sort of activity
where I'm going to be like hiking around
a lot, like every once in a while, like
I live in Northern California, so people
always want to go on hikes. That's cool.
I got to get my strength training done
first, though. So, no matter what time I
have to wake up to get that done, then I
can go and move a bunch of blood around
and I'll I'll still approach that in an
interval manner. Now, of course, when
you're walking and hiking, that's really
not that big of a deal because it really
require this this problem I'm talking
about really requires an elevated heart
rate to be in what's called target heart
rate. So that's actually not really a
good example, but it's the only example
that's real for my life because most of
the other like if somebody invited me to
go on a run, I'd just say no just
because you I don't want to deal with
that. I want all my recovery ability
going into building muscle and uh
keeping me I'm not at a deficit of
exercise. So I just I just choose not to
do that. And my body fat is really
controlled by my nutrition and so is
yours. So, if what you want to do is get
lean, you really don't need to do a lot
of cardio or or interval training or
really any of it. But if you just make
that one change to do it high intensity
for a minute and then like 10 minutes,
more moderate to lower intensity, you're
going to get the results you're looking
for and not sabotage yourself like most
people are doing who spend hours and
hours on the treadmill. I hope this
helps. If you want to argue with me,
boy, you better bring research because I
got some that I'll put in the comments
if you want. But, uh, thanks. I'll see
you in the next video. If this video
helped you, I want you to subscribe and
follow. I'm going to put out videos on a
regular basis. I think they're going to
help a whole lot of people, especially
if you're one of those people that
doesn't just instantly grow from lifting
regular weights. We've got the answer
for you.